# Conditioning on Time is All You Need for Synthetic Survival Data Generation

Abstract: Synthetic data generation holds considerable promise, offering avenues to enhance privacy, fairness, and data accessibility. Despite the availability of various methods for generating synthetic tabular data, challenges persist, particularly in specialized applications such as survival analysis. One significant obstacle in survival data generation is censoring, which manifests as not knowing the precise timing of observed (target) events for certain instances. Existing methods face difficulties in accurately reproducing the real distribution of event times for both observed (uncensored) events and censored events, {\em i.e.}, the generated event-time distributions do not accurately match the underlying distributions of the real data. So motivated, we propose a simple paradigm to produce synthetic survival data by generating covariates conditioned on event times (and censoring indicators), thus allowing one to reuse existing conditional generative models for tabular data without significant computational overhead, and without making assumptions about the (usually unknown) generation mechanism underlying censoring. We evaluate this method via extensive experiments on real-world datasets. Our methodology outperforms multiple competitive baselines at generating survival data, while also improving the performance of downstream survival models trained on such synthetic data.

To run the experiments in the paper, simply use the Jupyter notebooks for the respective experiments and add the path to the datasets (only for AIDS and FLCHAIN, other datasets will be imported automatically). 

To adapt existing tabular models for survival data generation using the proposed methodology in our paper, changes were made to the Synthcity Library [1]. These changes can be found at : https://github.com/anonymous-785/synthcity . All rights to the Synthcity library are reserved by the original authors.

[1] Qian, Zhaozhi, Rob Davis, and Mihaela van der Schaar. "Synthcity: a benchmark framework for diverse use cases of tabular synthetic data." Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
